Hi, and welcome to AlphaBits.
AlphaBits is an outlet for our inquisitive minds.
We can't stop experimenting with new technology, and
we wanna share what we're playing with with
you. We're your hosts, Brian and David. Hi.
I'm David, defender of the Rawkode Academy. I'm
a perpetual learner, always playing with new cool
tools that I'm gonna share with you as
part of this podcast. And I'm Brian. I'm
a developer advocate at Amazon,
and I love all the shiny new toys
in tech.
It's kind of my passion is is testing
out the new stuff and,
seeing what's cool. Alright. For anyone tuning in
on YouTube listening to this right now, there
was a podcast element you can check out
with all good podcast players. On that, Brian
told us why he is demoing
a new Linux operating system for us today.
So with that, Brian, take it away.
Alright. So what we are looking at here
is my daily driver desktop.
This is running a derivation of Fedora Silver
Blue.
And I gotta be honest. When I first
heard about this, the first thing I thought
was, Fedora? I'm
good. And I've been an Ubuntu guy forever
or PopOS.
I love the Debian
derivatives.
But
Silver Blue and,
specifically, Universal Blue have a draw that that's
really important and exciting for me. So I
wanna talk about
what what the foundation of this operating system
is. It's it's an operating system that's built
in the cloud native
methodology.
So if you go to the GitHub repository,
which is at uBlueOS,
you can see that, there's 46 repositories here,
and each of them defines
a container.
So the main, this is our base.
And this is,
the base container file that all of the
other images
inherit from.
So it starts off by adding a few
important things, packages that need to be installed
in the base operating system.
Each of the
derivatives
build off of that
main,
container file. And the one I'm running is
Bluefin, which is a an an Ubuntu like
experience
for Fedora.
And if you look at this container file,
let me
bump this up a bit, you could see
this it looks just like a Dockerfile because
it is a Dockerfile.
And the GitHub actions
for this repository
build the OCI container and push it up
to the GitHub container repository.
So let's look at
my system specifically.
Let's do an RPM OS three status.
And from here, you can see that my
system is booted off of a Docker image
called BluefinDX
NVIDIA,
and that comes from this repository that I
just showed you on GitHub.
I've got because it's RPM OS tree, I
get, my current and my last known good
configuration.
So if if I do something, I break
it. I can just roll it back.
But the exciting thing is is when we
make a change to the Bluefin repository,
GitHub actions
builds those images
and pushes them up to the GitHub container
repository.
And then I can just wait for my
computer to pull it. We've got a schedule
that pulls,
the next release
every afternoon. And if there's no release, it's
not a big deal. If there is, I
can just check this RPM o s three
status again.
And if I notice that there's an image
above this, the the live image, I can
just reboot to get that new image.
So it's everything you love about cloud native
and containers
but applied to a desktop.
That's really epic. We've got the whole operating
system scripted with a Just file. It's actually
three Just files. So if I type Just,
you can see all these things that are
kind of, friendly, helpful tools that let us
get going
in a way that we want to. So
some of them install,
Flatpaks for
the applications that we need. We've got DistroBox
built in. We've got NICs and DevBox built
in,
the t package manager.
We pretty much thought through everything you might
need as a cloud native developer,
and it's all just a a keystroke away.
So I I love this. It's it's been,
liberating
having a desktop
that I can't really break easily.
And if I do, I can just roll
it back,
with a container image. It's unbelievable.
So you're just running the standard bluefin image.
Or have you got your own version with
any tweaks to it? I I don't have
any personal tweaks,
but it it would be easy. I just
fork Bluefin and and inherit from it in
the container file.
But I really don't need to because all
the customizations I need, I can do either
with NICS or by adding my own GNOME
extensions.
So I've got access to everything. You can
see NICS is here.
We've got DistroBox.
So Podman,
don't have any containers running right now, but
I could.
See, previously, I did the CUDA test to
make sure that my NVIDIA card is able
to pass through to Podman. Works great.
I've got a distro box universal,
so I could do distro box enter
universal.
And now I'm in the,
Microsoft
dev container Universal dev container that they use
on Codespaces.
So I've got Go
in here already.
But if I exit back to the host,
there's no Go.
So it's it's pretty slick.
So what's the process if you did want
to add, like, a GNOME extension then?
Well, for for GNOME extension, I would just
open up the GNOME extension manager, which we
have here,
and that's on the wrong screen.
So you could just browse GNOME extensions and
install one that you like,
or you can remove some of the ones
that you have installed.
Okay. So you do have the ability to
write to parts of your operating system. It's
just the base Yes. It's like the core
OS. So
so the the home is obviously writable, and
Etsy is writable
as an overlay on top of the Etsy
that comes with the OS. So it does
use overlays
to persist
operating system level changes.
Okay. That's pretty cool. I mean, it makes
me kinda
you know, I run a Mac right now,
but, know, I keep trying. Every time I
go away from Linux, I've always got this
desire to go back to Linux.
Yeah.
And and that's kind of that that's where
I've lived too. You know, I I love
the Mac experience.
But for developing, for doing cloud native things,
Linux is kinda hand handy to have around.
I can run a Kubernetes setup because kind
is already installed, Scorpio's installed, Helm is installed.
All of the tools that I need are
already here, and they're guaranteed to be up
to date. So it it's it's really powerful.
Alright. There goes my weekend.
Thanks for that.
Yeah. Well, if you do give it a
shot, you know, throw it on an old
laptop or something and let us know what
you think because we're trying to make this
literally the best place for a developer to
live or a a DevOps engineer or any
cloud native people. You know, this it it's
got everything you need. We've we tried to
think of everything, but if there's something missing,
let us know. We'll add it. Are you
a contributor to?
I am. Yes. I'm a contributor to
Bluefin specifically,
but I also built,
Fleek, which is a home management platform for
Nick's OS or for Nick's.
So let's do get Fleek. So I built
this as part of the, uBlue
process
so that I can have
my dot files, my home configuration follow me
anywhere. So that's it. Get fleek dot dev.
Alright. Lots of things to check out. That's
very cool. Yeah. Good choice.
Alright. So I'll stop sharing. I wanna see
what you've got because I'm all about some
some
system configuration,
ClickOps
replacement stuff.
Well, yeah. I mean, unintended, but you've covered
desktop, and now I'm gonna cover cloud and
platform. So I have set a few things
up
just because
getting
SI, the System Initiative thing, up and running
does take a little bit of time. It
uses Dirt Enve, which has a Next Shell,
which takes like ten to fifteen minutes to
get everything bootstrapped. But only does it once
and then you're good. Okay. So this is
running until which spends up the entire SI
platform for you. You can see here, we've
got the back end which comprises of four
services, the front end, the platform itself,
and then the tilt file there. So everything
is up and running. Everything is healthy.
So can you explain what what tilt is
for us real quick? So tilt is you
write a tilt file,
and it basically just orchestrates containers. So you
say, I have these groups of containers go
back end. These groups of containers go front
end. They have dependencies. The front end can
only come online when the back end is
online. The back end consists of these four
container images,
and they expose these ports. And then it
does all of that for you. So it
just gives you, like, a really nice definite
experience. So
it's like a a better Docker Compose?
It definitely competes with Docker Compose.
Yeah. And it can even integrate web. So
if you do have a Docker Compose file,
but you just want this nice UI and
ability to kinda click in and, you know,
see the logs from all of the things,
then you can just have it wrapped Docker
Compose for you. But most of the value
comes from just just describing all your containers
and the dependencies properly,
whether in the type Tilt file.
And, also, you can kind of, like it
does performance enhancement things. So if you've got,
like, an interpreted language where you have to
mount the code into a container, it can
actually kind of do that in a way
that is a little bit more performant than
the standard Docker composements, volumements.
So, yeah, it's it's a nice tool. It
got bought by Docker about eighteen months ago,
maybe two years ago. I can't remember. It's
been a a while.
But it's still going strong. It's still a
really good tool for just saying, hey. My
development environment is not a single container with
a database. It's a bunch of things with
dependencies.
Let's make this easy for people. So yeah.
Very cool.
But that's not what we're looking at today.
So I'm gonna skip right past it. And
we're gonna now go over to here where
we have my SI workspace.
Right now, SI works with AWS with a
limited set of resources, but, you know, this
is a very, very early proof of concept
and demo from the SI team.
And so this is gonna, I imagine, support
more clouds and more resources over time. But
what it allows you to do is say,
well,
I want
AWS
region where I'm gonna deploy things to. So
we drag that onto the map, and we
can do all the little things you would
expect from, like, you know, a UI based
tool, resize, right click,
edit properties, and if you want. From here,
I can say, okay. Region do I want
to deploy to? And it loads all the
regions from
the API. So I can just say, hey.
I'm gonna deploy
to London.
And now test the model. So this is
a visual representation for the model, which is
all code.
And it makes sure that your model is
always valid at all points in time. If
your model is not valid, you will get
an error down here. But as you can
see, I have happy green text everywhere. Green
text are good. So we could say, well,
let's have an EC two instance.
Now this is not going to be green
because there are
inputs,
properties on this instance which are not going
to be satisfied.
So we'll let the model test and we'll
see that, okay, we have user data, security
group ID, key name, and an image ID.
The region name or the region is
grayed out because it's inferred
from In
the region. Okay. Exactly. And we actually you
know, we can't drag this out now. This
is no part of this. So
we pop this up and it will start
to tell us. You know, we can see
here the region is green, the region is
fine, but on this,
the instance type is required and that it
can't run the command because it's not in
a happy state.
So we could start to fill this out
where we drop in values to all these
things. But we can probably
let the inference handle most of this for
us. So we know that we need user
data. So for my user data, I'm gonna
use butane,
which is just
the core OS
and it system, I guess. So user data
provisioning system kinda like cloud in it. In
fact generator. Yeah. Yeah.
Which needs a container image and then has
an output of user So you can see
here the inputs are on the left, the
outputs are on the right. So we can
bring in and say, okay. Let's have a
docker image.
So we're just gonna start stitching this together
until we have a system we can deploy.
So
we can drag
this
to here.
So now this container image is gonna satisfy
this.
And we can change the image here to
be engine x.
Well, let's give that a second to test
the model again.
Testing does seem a little bit slow right
now, but this is extremely early software.
This is definitely putting the alpha into alphabets.
Yeah. It looks like it's doing a lot
though. So I I can appreciate that. Yeah.
So now it tells us our Docker image
is green. What I like about this is
if I say big image does not exist,
trying to type in enough characters so that
I don't accidentally get some random image.
It should actually go red and tell us
that this image can't be discovered.
And if that image name does exist, then
that's a there we go.
We got the cross.
So we could pop this up. We could
take a look. Okay. SI4117.
Image not real. So now, of course, we
can rename this. So we could just say,
you the resource name is NGINX. The image
that we want is NGINX.
And then we can just kinda quickly through
and tie up some of these dots. So
we need a key pair.
We need a security group. We need an
ingress rule.
We can drag our user data onto our
instance. I know my lines are not gonna
be particularly straight here, so let me just,
you know,
do this.
We can see their instance needs a security
group ID, so we can connect it on
that now.
Now is this logged in to an your
AWS account? So it it pulls your available
keys and It gives us ambient authentication. So
whatever my CLI is configured with. Okay. Perfect.
Let it test the model before I start
dragging more things and slowing it down.
Cool.
Now we can drag our key name. We
can drag our security group onto the security
group ID.
Our Docker container expose these ports. You can
see there's an output on this container image.
So we can click on this and we
can say, okay. Let's add
and let's expose this
AT on
TCP.
This now becomes something we can use over
here and part of our security group where
we can see that exposed reports or Docker
container uses.
So Oh, wow. It just kind of magically
builds all of this in the background to
the point where we get happy, and then
we merge this change set, and then we
can deploy it. So the last thing we
need is a
AMI ID,
which I need to grab from I'll just
grab one from the Fedora website
for my region,
which is here. So I'm gonna click on
our EC two instance.
And the image ID, I'm just gonna drop
that in.
And as this type, I'll just go with
a t through t three large. We'll keep
that nice and simple.
And
I think
that
should be enough.
So the AMI you chose for
core OS?
Yes. Yeah. And
the fedora core OS image because we're using
butane.
Oh, wait. Why did I copy this here?
What we want is an AMI.
And we add the image ID to this,
and then we connect the dots with our
instance.
There
we go. So that should put us in
the green.
So what do we have? We have a
region. We have an easy two instance.
The user data for the instance is generated
from the butane module, which knows and understands
the docker image that we want to run,
which also exposes ports, which goes as an
ingress rule, which automatically configured on our security
group. We have a key peer key pair
that is created for our instance and an
AMI configuration.
Still complaining, but I think we're okay. So
I'm gonna say merge,
and we merge this into
the state of the world. Now when you
merge the change set,
it gives you a plan, like a Terraform
plan of the actions that you need to
make in order to realize this configuration.
We can see here, we want to create
the key pair, security group, the instance, and
the ingress. So we can see select all
and apply.
And this will now spend the next thirty
to sixty seconds running through the system, creating
all of these resources
and
or maybe my STS access has now actually
disappeared. So let me reconfigure that.
So what tool is it using in the
background to apply these? Is it a CloudFormation?
Is it TerraForm? Is it Pulumi? Is it
something
some other thing? Or is it own its
own thing?
You know what? I'm not entirely sure. I
do think it's CloudFormation. I know it's using
the AWS CLI to do a lot of
this stuff. I don't know if it's actually
calling out and just using,
you know, AWS
compute key pair create. It it may very
well be.
So let's see if we can fix my
permissions real quick.
Any questions while we kinda wait for this
to catch up with me?
No. This is fascinating.
Hurry up and fail.
Infrastructure
is connect the dots.
Yes. Like I said in the earlier segment,
though, is that you still get the ability
to drop down and to code. So
we can take a look at that as
well
if we have enough time.
I think my what I might do is
just delete most of this and it will
just create a
key pair.
Well, maybe it'll catch up. And you said
this was multiplayer,
so you could invite someone to come in
and collaborate on this with you?
Yeah. So these workspaces,
can add more people to.
You can work on your chain sets at
the same time. You can go over architectures.
You can do whatever it is that you
need to do.
Okay. That thing that failed.
Alright. I actually see the key pair created.
That should be nice and quick. So we
can go over to the management console.
So we can go to easy two and
key pairs.
And those are SI2165SI2165.
That completes it. Yep.
You can see all the information here. So
if you do wanna grab this into your
local machine, you know, the private key is
there. You can save it locally. Of course,
you would have to add a new ingress
to expose the port 22 because obviously that's
not gonna be there by default. And even
with core west, I'm not sure how much
access you would get anyway.
We can see now our security group was
created.
We can come into our security group,
and we have our SI 2536.
So that's gonna create all of those resources
for us exposing NGINX
and
things are nice.
You have different views. So you can come
to the analyze view here where you can
click on, say, your key pair, instance,
and you can see the code that it
used to create it.
This looks like cloud formation to me, so
I suspect that it may be. But it
also could just be a JSON representation of
what gets passed to the AWS CLI. I'm
not that sure.
As things change, you can just reel refresh
the resource by clicking this button here.
If things change on the console, it will
actually pull those changes in.
And now when you're happy with your production,
you come and say, well, let's make a
new change set and say, we wanna deploy,
you know, bluefin,
which I know we can't really do.
But we could just make up our own
change set and start adding more resources to
our
entire workspace.
But it's a pretty select system. It's very
early. It's very cool. It's got a lot
of promise,
and I just can't wait for them to
support
more resources. Like, being able to provision a
Kubernetes cluster, an EKS cluster through this interface,
I think, would just be phenomenal.
And even to the point where it automatically
builds the provider for Kubernetes and lets me
just drag and drop on Kubernetes resources or
custom resources. Like,
I think the power and flexibility of this
platform could be a bit of a game
changer. Yeah. A lot of potential here. Yeah.
Definitely.
Alright.
Well, that's the first alphabets.
Hooray.
So we gotta do this again. Awesome. I
can't wait. There's enough software there that looks
like we're gonna run out of ideas anytime
soon. Not a chance. We'll run out of
trouble. We hope you enjoyed the demo of
both of these amazing tools. If you wanna
hear why we showed up for these tools,
check out the podcast available at alphabets.fm.
Until next week. See you soon.